
 
Slide 1  
CS 170 
Java Programming 1 
Swatting Bugs
Duration: 00:01:49
Advance mode: Auto
Notes:
Hi Folks. Welcome to the CS 170, Java Programming 1 
lecture, Swatting Bugs. 
How many of you have all of your programs run perfectly the 
first time? Not many, I'll bet. It's also pretty frustrating when 
your program runs incorrectly and you aren't sure why. You 
could just change things at random and hope to get better 
results the next time, but that's really not very effective. To 
actually find the source of the problem, you need to insert 
diagnostic print statements into your code, so you can 
examine the state of your variables at different points. Once 
you've located the general area where the problem appears, 
then you can insert more print statements to drill down to the 
line of code that's causing the problem.
Of course, this can be a tedious and time-consuming process, 
since you have to insert the print statements, analyze them, 
adjust them, and then remove them once you've found and 
corrected the bug. Wouldn't be nice if you could just put your 
program into a state of suspended animation, and then just 
look at the contents of your variables, kind of like BlueJ's 
Inspect command? 
The good new is, you can. 
In this lecture you'll learn how to use a program called a 
debugger. A debugger helps you find bugs by tracing through 
the program, pausing it temporarily, and then examining any 
variables you're interested in, before resuming. 
Debuggers vary widely from one system to another, but the 
Eclipse debugger, which we'll examine in this lecture, is really 
quite sophisticated. The basic debugging skills you'll learn and 
use, though, will work on any system; only the names of the 
commands will change as you move from IDE to IDE. 

 
Slide 2  
Using a Debugger
Duration: 00:00:52
Advance mode: Auto
Notes:
Modern IDEs, like Eclipse, contain debugging programs that 
allow you to interactively execute your programs. You can 
stop and restart your program and see the contents of 
variables whenever your program is temporarily suspended. 
At each stop, you have the choice of what variables to inspect 
and how many program steps to run until the next stop.
Debuggers are not really a tool for lazy programmers. If you 
don't know what your program is supposed to do, and you 
don't know what values your variables are supposed to 
contain, then a debugger won't help you at all. While using a 
debugger is more convenient than inserting diagnostic print 
commands, is not cost-free. It does take time to set up and 
carry out an effective debugging session.
That's what you'll learn to do in this lecture.

 
Slide 3  
Three Useful Commands
Duration: 00:01:51
Advance mode: Auto
Notes:
As your Java programs get larger, you'll find that simple print 
statements are just no longer adequate. You really will need to 
learn how to use a debugger. Fortunately, three very basic 
commands will cover 80 or 90% of the debugging that you'll 
need to do.
*	First, you'll need to be able to identify a particular location 
in your program, and then just run the program normally 
until that point is reached. When your program comes to 
the location you've specified, it will go into the 
"suspended" state. These are called breakpoints, and your 
program can have any number of them.
*	With your program suspended, you'll then want to 
examine the state of your variables by inspecting them. A 
good debugger will let you examine local variables and 
instance variables and both object and primitive types. 
You'll often be given the opportunity to specify which 
variables you want to examine (called a "watch") so you 
don't have to go hunting through dozens of variables to 
find the ones you're interested in.
*	Finally, if you don't immediately find the problem by 
inspecting the variables, you'll need the ability to run your 
program in slow motion, a line at a time. Debuggers allow 
you to execute a single line and then pause again, so that 
you can inspect the changes made by that line. They will 
also let you specify whether a line containing a method 
call should be followed, thus stepping into the method, or 
whether you should just call the method, thus stepping 
over it.
While debuggers vary from platform to platform, every 
debugger will support these three operations, even if the 
names and techniques are slightly different. That means that 
learning to create breakpoints, watch variables, and step over 
your code using Eclipse will be valuable, even if you end up 
working with a different IDE.

 
Slide 4  
Eclipse Debugging Sample
Duration: 00:01:37
Advance mode: Auto
Notes:
To have a realistic example for running a debugger, let's walk 
through the sample debugging session in Section 6.7 in you 
text. In the printed book that's on page 267.  To do this, we'll 
study a class named Word whose primary purpose is to count 
the number of syllables in a word. 
You'll find the two classes, Word.java and 
SyllableCounter.java, inside the ic17 project. Go ahead and 
open them both now and then select the Word class.
Here's the rule that the class uses to count syllables:
*	Each group of adjacent vowels (a, e, i, o, u, y) counts as 
one syllable (for example, the “ea” in “peach” contributes 
one syllable, but the “e . . . o” in “yellow” counts as two 
syllables). However, an “e” at the end of a word doesn't 
count as a syllable. Each word has at least one syllable, 
even if the previous rules give a count of 0.
*	The program also strips off any non-letter characters that 
appear at the beginning and end of the string, since you 
don't want to count quotation or punctuation marks.
OK, let's get started. Run the testing program, 
SyllableCounter, and then enter "hello yellow peach." as the 
input. Shoot me a screen-shot of the result. Start a new 
section in your exercise document, and paste the screen-shot 
in as Exercise 1.

 
Slide 5  
Run To a Particular Line
Duration: 00:01:32
Advance mode: Auto
Notes:
As you can see, when you run the program, it tells you that 
there is one syllable in hello, one syllable in yellow and one 
syllable in peach. I guess one in three isn't bad, but we can do 
better. The debugger will allow us to run the program step-by-
step and examine it. To do this, we'll need to put the program 
into suspended animation when it encounters the portion of 
the program that we want to examine. The only question is, 
"where to start?"
Using a debugger won't answer that question for you, but it 
does give you a way to find the answer. Remember, your 
debugger is a tool you'll use to investigate your program: you'll 
still have to use your logic skills to ferret out the clues.
So, here's a clue. What part of the program is incorrect?
Well, the number of syllables doesn't seem to work. So, look 
through the Word class and you'll find a method named 
countSyllables. That seems like a really promising place to 
start our investigation.
To start debugging your program at the countSyllables 
method, we need to put a breakpoint on the line containing the 
method header. Simply find the line, and then right-click just to 
the left of the line number. From the context menu, select 
Toggle Breakpoint. Once you have a breakpoint, snap me a 
screenshot for Exercise 2.

 
Slide 6  
Starting the Debugger
Duration: 00:01:18
Advance mode: Auto
Notes:
Now that you have the breakpoint set, you need to start the 
debugger. That's pretty easy. Just make sure that 
SyllableCounter is the selected file (this won't work if 
Word.java, where you put the breakpoint is still selected, since 
it doesn't have a main() method). I've marked this step #1 in 
the slide shown here.
Then, click the icon that looks like a little beetle; it's obviously 
supposed to be a "bug".
The first time you debug SyllableCounter you'll see the little 
dialog that asks "how" you want to debug it. Choose "Java 
Application" (since we're not running anything on a server), 
and click OK. 
The program will start running, just like it did before. When 
asked to enter your sentence, enter hello yellow peach., just 
as before.
At this point, you're presented with another dialog, which is 
kind of jarring. Don't worry. All it's saying is that when you 
debug your program, it will switch away from the Java 
perspective to the Debug perspective. That's what we want. I'd 
go ahead and click the little checkbox I've marked #1, so you 
don't have to click OK each time you start debugging your 
program.

 
Slide 7  
The Debug Perspective
Duration: 00:02:58
Advance mode: Auto
Notes:
Once the debug perspective pops up, shoot me a screen-shot, 
so that I can see that you can start the debugger. Paste it into 
your IC document as Exercise 3.
Let's look quickly at the relevant views, and then we'll 
customize it to optimize your debugging experience.
1.	On the left at #1 is the Debug window which acts as a sort 
of global control panel; it shows you which programs are 
active and suspend and what line is currently executing. 
As you can see, we're debugging the SyllableCounter 
program. The main method called countSyllables at line 
25 and then the main thread was suspended at line 43 on 
the entry to countSyllables.
2.	On the top of the of the Debug window is a small toolbar 
(marked #2) containing buttons allowing you to step 
through your code, line by line. We'll be using these 
buttons shortly.
3.	The source code window appears in the center of the 
screen at #3. Notice the green line highlighting line 43, 
along with the small arrow appearing in the left-hand 
margin. This shows you which line of code is "in the 
wings" waiting to be executed next. This line of code has 
not yet run, however. (Why your program didn't stop on 
the heading line, where you actually put the breakpoint? 
Because a method header doesn't contain any executable 
statements. You can put a breakpoint on any line of code 
in your program, but the debugger will stop on the first line 
of executable code at or following the breakpoint.)
4.	Since line 43 hasn't yet executed, the variable count is not 
yet created. In #4 we can see and examine each of the 
variables as they are created. The only thing in the 
window now is the variable named this, which refers to the 
current object. If you click the little plus sign to its left, you 
can see the instance variables contained in the current 
object, like this.
5.	Finally, #5 shows the breakpoint window where you can 
see a list of all active breakpoints and activate and 
deactivate them without going through the source code 
window. This is really useful when debugging multi-file 
programs.
OK. Let's simplify this perspective a little bit.
1.	Close the Outline window. It's really not necessary.
2.	Drag the Breakpoints tab over into the same pane as the 
Variables, and then minimize the pane appearing at the 
bottom of the screen in the center.
3.	Finally, let's add an Expressions (or Watch) View to the 
variables pane as well, like this.
Here's what your finished Debug Perspective should look like. 
For Exercise 4, shoot me a screenshot after you've rearranged 
everything.


 
Slide 8  
Step Over and Into
Duration: 00:03:00
Advance mode: Auto
Notes:
Now, let's look at the code. First, the countSyllables method 
needs to check the last character of the word to see if it is a 
letter ’e’. Remember that we're not going to count a trailing 'e' 
as a syllable. As you can see in the code here, the program 
calculates the position of the last character (at text.length() – 
1) and then uses the charAt() method to extract the character 
and store it in the char variable ch.
Let's go forward to that point and see if ch actually contains 
the value that we expect. Since our first word was "hello", it 
should contain an 'o'. This is really the key to debugging; 
knowing what values your variables should contain at any 
given point, and then checking to see if the actual value is 
what you expect.
To run our program in "slow motion", we'll use the various 
"step" commands on the Debug window toolbar, shown below. 
(You'll probably want to memorize the keyboard shortcuts as 
well, because that can be much more efficient.) Here's what 
the various commands do:
*	The Step Over command (the arrow on the right), 
executes the "current" line of code, but if the line of code 
contains a method call, it does not step "into" the method, 
but simply executes the entire line. In other words, after 
doing a "step over", you'll find yourself in the same source 
file, on the next line of executable code. You should 
always use Step Over if a line of code contains a library 
function, like line 44 which calls the String length() 
method. You don't want to start debugging the Java class 
libraries. The keyboard shortcut for Step Over is F6.
*	The Step Into command jumps to the first line inside a 
method, when the method is part of the current line. If 
there are multiple method calls on that line, then you'll 
jump into them in the order that they are evaluated in the 
expression. Usually you'll only use Step Into to examine a) 
your own code, and b) only when you have already 
narrowed down the problem to a particular method. The 
keyboard shortcut for Step Into is F5.
*	The Run menu also has a handy "Run to Line" command 
that is useful if you don't want to step over several 
different lines. You place the cursor on the line you want 
to jump to in your source code. The keyboard shortcut for 
Run to Line is Control + R.
For Exercise 5, use these techniques to run to the line 
following the line where ch is assigned a value. (That's line 49 
in my slides here, but it might be different on your computer, 
depending on the source formatting.) That's the line that starts 
with if (ch == 'e'). Shoot me a screenshot and paste it into your 
IC document.

 
Slide 9  
Inspecting Variables
Duration: 00:02:01
Advance mode: Auto
Notes:
With the program stopped, you can now inspect the value 
stored in the variable ch. Eclipse has several ways to do this.
First, you can simply hover your cursor over the variable in the 
source code. This is known as a quick watch.
Second, you can use the "Variables" view. The variables view 
displays the contents of all variables that are in scope. To see 
the contents of instance variables, you'll need to expand the 
"this" node, like you saw on previous screens. Local variables 
will appear and disappear as they go in and out of scope.
In the Variables view you can also change the value of a 
variable at any point and then continue debugging. This can 
be really handy because when you notice a mistake you don't 
have to stop your debugging session, make the change to 
your source code to fix the mistaken value, and then step 
through your code so you can pick up at the point you left off. 
Instead, you can just make the change, like this, and continue 
on as if the value were correct.
A word of warning, though. If you do make changes to 
variables using the Variables view, make sure you write 
yourself a note so that you remember to change the source 
code after your debugging session is over. If you don't, your 
program will still be incorrect, even if you got through the 
debugging session successfully.
Now, look at the value for ch. You can see that ch contains the 
value ’l’. That is strange. Look at the source code. The end 
variable was set to text.length() - 1, the last position in the text 
string, and ch is the character at that position. But, the word 
should be "hello", so the last character should be "o".
What this means is that we've encountered our first bug. 
Unfortunately, we still don't know what caused it!



 
Slide 10  
Watching Variables
Duration: 00:01:10
Advance mode: Auto
Notes:
Eclipse has one more way for you to examine variables: by 
creating a "Watch" expression in the Expressions view. This 
allows you to specify the variables or expressions that you 
want to see, and not have to sort through all of the variables in 
and out of scope in the Variables view.
To create a Watch, switch to the Expressions window and 
right-click. From the context menu, select Add Watch 
expression.
When the Add Watch Expression dialog appears, simply type 
in the variable you want to watch and click OK. Do NOT press 
the enter key after typing in your variable name. That creates 
an expression consisting of your variable name along with a 
newline, which is not what you want.
Now, as your program runs, you'll be able to see (and 
optionally change) the values of only the variables you are 
really interested in. Since ch contains the value "l", when it 
should contain "o", let's look at the second variable in our 
code, "end". Add these two watches and for Exercise 6 snap a 
screenshot.

 
Slide 11  
Restarting
Duration: 00:01:32
Advance mode: Auto
Notes:
OK. Now the problem is obvious. Since the end is 3, that 
means that instead of "hello" we're looking at the last 
character in the word "hell". It looks like we've already gone 
past the problem.
While you can step forward into your code, there are no 
buttons for "rewinding" or stepping backwards. Instead, you'll 
need to terminate the program, and then set a second 
breakpoint earlier in your code. You may need to do this 
several times as you attempt to narrow down the section of 
code where the error first appears.
To terminate your current debugging session, click the little 
red "stop" square appearing in the slide here.
The countVowels method processes the characters contained 
in the instance variable named text. What we need to find is 
where the text variable is initialized. That's not too hard 
because, as you know, you'll usually initialize your instance 
variables inside the class constructor.
For Exercise 7, put a breakpoint on the Word constructor. 
Then, add watches for the variables i, j and text. Single step 
through the code (or run to line) so that you're on the line 
where the text instance variable is assigned a value. Then, 
single step and shoot me a screen-shot of your variables.

 
Slide 12  
Tracking Down the Problem
Duration: 00:01:07
Advance mode: Auto
Notes:
To see the problem, you have to look at the values in your 
watch window:
1.	As you can see, i and j contain 0 and 4, which is what 
you'd expect for the word hello. (Remember that the first 
character is 0, so the last index is going to be one less 
than the length.) It looks like they are OK.
2.	When we look at the value for text, though, you can see it 
only contains four, not five characters. 
3.	That means that we can definitely say that the bug occurs 
on the line the assigns the value to the variables text. 
Since i and j are correct, apparently we've made a mistake 
using the substring method, and that seems to be the 
case.
You remember that while the first parameter in the substring 
method is the character we want to start with, the last 
parameter is not the ending index, but the index that is "one 
past" the end. To grab the characters i through j, we need to 
use j + 1 as the second parameter when calling the substring 
method.

 
Slide 13  
Try Again
Duration: 00:01:19
Advance mode: Auto
Notes:
OK, so we've fixed the problem. Everything should be just 
great, right?
Well, let's see. 
For Exercise 7, switch over to the Breakpoints pane and 
disable both of the two breakpoints by "unchecking" the 
checkbox next to the name like this. Run the program by using 
the "Run" button and enter "hello yellow peach." once again.
Do you get what you expect? Probably not. Shoot me a 
screenshot.
It looks like we have to investigate further.
Re-enable just the breakpoint for the countSyllable method 
and then start debugging again. This time, instead of entering 
hello yellow peach, just enter hello followed by a period. 
Since the problem seem to be with the variable count, (which 
reports the number of syllables) create a watch expression for 
count and another for ch (if you deleted it previously). 
Remember that we want to count a syllable whenever we get 
a sequence of vowels. That means we should count a syllable 
when we encounter the "e" in hello, and a second one when 
we encounter the "o". 
Let's see if that happens by single-stepping through the 
countSyllables method.


 
Slide 14  
Checking Vowels
Duration: 00:02:15
Advance mode: Auto
Notes:
Here's what you should see as you trace through the program.
1.	Notice that at the beginning of the loop which will process 
the instance variable text, the boolean variable 
insideVowelGroup is false and count is 0. That looks OK.
2.	Now, inside the body of the loop, the first character is 
extracted (the "h" from hello shown at #1 here) and a test 
is made at #2 to see if it's a vowel. It obviously isn't, so the 
entire body of the if statement is skipped and execution 
jumps back to the next repetition of the for loop for the 
next character.
3.	The next time through the loop, the second character is an 
"e" (at #1). Since that is a vowel (at #2), we go up to the 
second if statement. Since insideVowelGroup is still false 
(it was set right before the loop began), we'll enter the 
nested if statement, increment the variable count, counting 
the first syllable, and then set insideVowelGroup true so 
that any subsequent vowels in this group won't be counted 
as separate syllables.
4.	Our second syllable should be counted when we come to 
the "o" at the end of the string. Stepping through the code 
to that point, we find that we enter the first if statement, 
correctly, but the insideVowelGroup variable is still true 
(even though the last character was the "l" immediately 
before the "o", which definitely is NOT a vowel.). 
Looking carefully at the code, you can probably see the error 
now. When we encounter the first vowel in a group, we set the 
boolean flag insideVowelGroup. We forgot, though to reset it 
to false, once we have left the vowel group. To do that, it looks 
like all we need is an else statement here that sets 
insideVowelGroup to false anytime we read a character that is 
not a vowel.
For Exercise 8, go ahead and make this fix. Then run your 
program again with "hello yellow peach." Shoot me a screen-
shot when it runs correctly.


 
Slide 15  
First, You Break It
Duration: 00:01:44
Advance mode: Auto
Notes:
Debugging your code is a process—a series of steps that help 
you find and fix the errors in your program. The process 
begins when you determine that your program is producing 
the wrong output (something you'll normally discover by 
testing.) The goal of the process is to fix the program, and this 
is best done in several disciplined steps; it's altogether too 
easy to fix one problem, and, in the process, introduce 
another.
To avoid that, you should perform each of the following steps 
in the debugging process: break it, isolate it, fix it and test it
It might seems strange that the first step in fixing your program 
is to break it; after all, if your program wasn't already broken to 
begin with, you certainly wouldn't be debugging it now. 
Well, that's not what breaking it means. Rather than 
introducing new errors, breaking it refers to your ability to force 
your program to fail reliably; that is, repeatedly and at will. If 
your program bugs appear sporadically and unexpectedly, 
then you don't really have a very good chance of catching 
them.
Breaking a program involves reproducing the conditions under 
which it fails. Ask yourself what numbers you entered, where 
did you click the mouse, what input was provided, what 
controls were clicked and in what order. Then, sit down and 
perform exactly the same actions making sure that you've 
isolated the circumstances where the error occurs.
Don't try to fix the program until you can break it at will. Until 
that occurs, you don't really know what the problem is.

 
Slide 16  
Next, Isolate and Understand
Duration: 00:02:11
Advance mode: Auto
Notes:
The next step, to locate and isolate the bug, is the most 
difficult of the four, so be patient and be prepared to take your 
time. To do this, you'll use the techniques of divide and 
conquer. Here's how.
*	If you have no idea where in your code the error occurs, 
place a breakpoint on the main() method and start 
Stepping over each of the methods that appear there. 
After you step over each method, examine the variables or 
output to see if the error your trying to fix has occurred. 
*	When the error occurs, locate the last method right before 
the error occurred. Then, Step Into that procedure and 
repeat the process; stepping Over each line inside that 
procedure. In this way, you'll repeatedly narrow your 
search until you'll come to the single statement that 
causes the error.
Once you've located the bug, before you can fix it you'll have 
to understand exactly what caused the problem. To 
understand the bug, you have to have a firm grip on what your 
program should do. What that means is:
*	Before you inspect a variable, how have to know the 
expected values. Just looking at the values won't help at 
all, if you don't know what the values should be.
*	When the value is correct, don't be afraid to look 
elsewhere. Often this requires you to rethink what is 
causing the problem. If multiple variables are used in a 
calculation, for instance, make sure you look at all of 
them, not just the final "output" variable.
*	Make sure you double-check your computations, 
especially if they involve integers and floating point 
number or library methods. If you are calling a method, 
like the substring() method in our example in this lecture, 
revisit the documentation to make sure you are doing it 
correctly. Just because you don't have a syntax error 
doesn't mean that you are using a method correctly. 
Sometimes this means putting things aside for a bit and 
coming back to the problem later. This gives your 
subconscious mind a chance to chew on the problem a 
bit.

 
Slide 17  
Fix and Test
Duration: 00:02:16
Advance mode: Auto
Notes:
Once you understand your program well enough to see why 
it's not working, you're ready to fix it. Think through the 
changes you need to make. Look at the big picture, especially 
when you are working with large numbers or performing a 
complex calculation. Is the answer you're getting generally 
reasonable?
Sometimes the change you need to make is simple and 
involve only a single line of code; other times you may realize 
that your whole concept was flawed and you'll need to 
redesign an entire method or even an entire class.
If you've ever watched television, you've probably seen the 
situation-comedy episode where the well-meaning father 
decides to fix the roof or the shower instead of calling in an 
expensive professional. This plot device has endured for so 
many years because it is so true to human nature; all of us 
tend to rush in blindly, "fixing" things but leaving the situation 
worse than when we began.
To avoid having to call in the "software plumber" to repair your 
fixes, it's always a good idea to make a backup of your code 
before performing radical surgery. For more modest changes, 
you might want to comment out the original line of code before 
adding your new changes, in the event that you discover your 
original code was correct after all.
At this point, 90% of the programmers will pack up their tools 
and head for home. A good craftsman always performs one 
more step: testing the repair to see if the new kitchen light 
actually can be turned on and off.
Testing and debugging are not the same thing. Debugging 
begins when you learn that your program contains an error. It 
is the process of isolating the bug and removing it. Testing, on 
the other hand, is aimed at determining exactly what bugs still 
remain in your program.
Testing turns into debugging when an error is found and 
debugging should always transition back to testing to make 
sure your fixes are good. In the testing-debugging process you 
will constantly bounce back and forth between these two until 
you're sufficiently confident that no serious bugs remain.


 
CS 170 Lecture: Swatting Bugs	Page 1 of 11	© 2008-2075 Stephen Gilbert
